Then follow me, and give me audience, friends.Cassius, go you into the other street,And part the numbers.Those that will hear me speak, let 'em stay here;Those that will follow Cassius, go with him;And public reasons shall be renderedOf Caesar's death.I will hear Brutus speak.I will hear Cassius; and compare their reasons,When severally we hear them rendered.The noble Brutus is ascended: silence!Be patient till the last.Romans, countrymen, and lovers! hear me for mycause, and be silent, that you may hear: believe mefor mine honour, and have respect to mine honour, thatyou may believe: censure me in your wisdom, andawake your senses, that you may the better judge.If there be any in this assembly, any dear friend ofCaesar's, to him I say, that Brutus' love to Caesarwas no less than his. If then that friend demandwhy Brutus rose against Caesar, this is my answer:--Not that I loved Caesar less, but that I lovedRome more. Had you rather Caesar were living anddie all slaves, than that Caesar were dead, to liveall free men? As Caesar loved me, I weep for him;as he was fortunate, I rejoice at it; as he wasvaliant, I honour him: but, as he was ambitious, Islew him. There is tears for his love; joy for hisfortune; honour for his valour; and death for hisambition. Who is here so base that would be abondman? If any, speak; for him have I offended.Who is here so rude that would not be a Roman? Ifany, speak; for him have I offended. Who is here sovile that will not love his country? If any, speak;for him have I offended. I pause for a reply.Then none have I offended. I have done no more toCaesar than you shall do to Brutus. The question ofhis death is enrolled in the Capitol; his glory notextenuated, wherein he was worthy, nor his offencesenforced, for which he suffered death.Here comes his body, mourned by Mark Antony: who,though he had no hand in his death, shall receivethe benefit of his dying, a place in thecommonwealth; as which of you shall not? With thisI depart,--that, as I slew my best lover for thegood of Rome, I have the same dagger for myself,when it shall please my country to need my death.Live, Brutus! live, live!Bring him with triumph home unto his house.Give him a statue with his ancestors.Let him be Caesar.Caesar's better partsShall be crown'd in Brutus.We'll bring him to his houseWith shouts and clamours.My countrymen,--Peace, silence! Brutus speaks.Peace, ho!Good countrymen, let me depart alone,And, for my sake, stay here with Antony:Do grace to Caesar's corpse, and grace his speechTending to Caesar's glories; which Mark Antony,By our permission, is allow'd to make.I do entreat you, not a man depart,Save I alone, till Antony have spoke.Stay, ho! and let us hear Mark Antony.Let him go up into the public chair;We'll hear him. Noble Antony, go up.For Brutus' sake, I am beholding to you.What does he say of Brutus?He says, for Brutus' sake,He finds himself beholding to us all.'Twere best he speak no harm of Brutus here.This Caesar was a tyrant.Friends, Romans, countrymen, lend me your ears;I come to bury Caesar, not to praise him.The evil that men do lives after them;The good is oft interred with their bones;So let it be with Caesar. The noble BrutusHath told you Caesar was ambitious:If it were so, it was a grievous fault,And grievously hath Caesar answer'd it.Here, under leave of Brutus and the rest--For Brutus is an honourable man;So are they all, all honourable men--Come I to speak in Caesar's funeral.He was my friend, faithful and just to me:But Brutus says he was ambitious;And Brutus is an honourable man.He hath brought many captives home to RomeWhose ransoms did the general coffers fill:Did this in Caesar seem ambitious?When that the poor have cried, Caesar hath wept:Ambition should be made of sterner stuff:Yet Brutus says he was ambitious;And Brutus is an honourable man.You all did see that on the LupercalI thrice presented him a kingly crown,Which he did thrice refuse: was this ambition?Yet Brutus says he was ambitious;And, sure, he is an honourable man.I speak not to disprove what Brutus spoke,But here I am to speak what I do know.You all did love him once, not without cause:What cause withholds you then, to mourn for him?O judgment! thou art fled to brutish beasts,And men have lost their reason. Bear with me;My heart is in the coffin there with Caesar,And I must pause till it come back to me.